PREFACE. 'vii

Since, however, the dispersion of error is a step, and that not
an unimportant one, towards the attainment of truth, a few
sentences may be devoted in examining the accuracy of the

statements hitherto promulgated as to the authorship, anti· '

quity, etc. of this Chronicle, before venturing to make any ob-
servations upon these important subjects.

' Nicolson, Dalrymple, and others, state that it is partly the
productiori of English writers, partly of Scotchmen. The first
portion, which they ascribe to an English author, extends, say
they, to about the period “ when the little convent of Dundrai-
nand was founded;''* in confirmation of which they add that
Bede is styled “ decus et gloria gentis nostrae.’'† It might be
urged, with great reason, that the writer of that introduction,
considering Bede, as he afterwards ‘styles him, ‘⁴ doctor non
solum Anglomm verumetiam universae . . . . ecclesiae‚’' might,
without any breach of national feeling, use the words “ gentis
nostra? seeing that the great luminary of the saxon church,
whom he so much admires, and whose labours it was the object
of his present employment to continue, was born, spent a long
life, and died, within less than ahundred miles of Mehose. But
it may rather be remarked, that to adduce such an expression
as proof of the English authorship of this part os the Chronicle,
betrays aforgetfulness of the relative position and circumstances

· of the two countries when these words were penned. Prior to
the bloody wars commenced by Edward the First‚ and the feel-
ings of enmity which, originating in them, continued to inflame
the two nations with mutual hatred to a period comparatively

recent, the sovereigns of Northern and Southern Britain were,
in general, upon terms of intimacy, if not of friendship; and

‚⁵ Nicol. Engl. Libr. p. 63. l Dalrymple, p. 205.

 

